# CS5800 - Algorithms: Final Project

## How to run?

Open the project directory in the terminal and run this command:

``python[your version of python] main.py [path to a .csv file] [name of the column in the csv file]
``

Sample .csv files are accessible from the ``/db`` subdirectory.

At the moment the app only works with integer numerical data.

## Topic

Visualization and Quantitative Comparisons of Various Sorting Algorithms for Large Data Sets

## Context

Everyone has their own unique way of learning. From adapting to digital coursework to staying disciplined with minimal
face-to-face interactions, getting used to this new type of education may cause students to struggle — especially if
their individual learning style isn’t being addressed. Gaining momentum in the 1960s through tests like the Myers-Briggs
Type Indicator, the learning style theory posits that different students learn best when information is presented to
them in a particular way. The learning style theory was popularized in 1992 when Fleming and Mills suggested a new model
of learning. The VARK Model is used to explain the different ways that students learn - Visual, Auditory,
Reading-Writing and Kinesthetic.

Visual learning refers to a mode of learning where students rely on graphic aids to remember and learn material. Visual
learners can easily visualize objects, have a great sense of balance and alignment, are very color-oriented and can
effortlessly envision imagery. Visual learners learn best by color-coding their notes, making to-do lists and using
concept maps to organize their thoughts.

When it comes to algorithms, some people consume the information by reading through pseudocode to understand the
specifics while others may process that same information by visualizing how an algorithm works. Our group aims to dive
further into the concept of visual learning and make algorithms more intuitive for their users by implementing
visualizations for some of most frequently used sorting algorithms. Each of us have our own unique motivation for
driving and implementing this goal. Coming into the Align program with diverse backgrounds, we have handled large
volumes of data in our respective fields. At the same time, we have come across the lack of educational tools and
knowledge for non-CS professionals to be able to sort through and implement a sorting program to easily access and
categorize the required parameterized data.

Aditya’s motivation for pursuing this topic is because he loves to build financial products that users love. Having more
context with tradeoffs for selecting one algorithmic implementation versus another gives him more perspective during the
costs/benefit analysis phase of product development. These insights are extremely valuable for making decisions and
prioritizing which feature to build based on accurate data.

Coming from the healthcare background, Shriya is passionate about this topic because she finds learning visually very
effective. Her experience of conducting various research working with tons of patient information in the medical field
exposed the problem of not being able to effectively categorize data and motivated her to understand the driving forces
behind how this data can be more effectively sorted through. Visualizing the ways different data sets are being sorted
and categorized satiate this curiosity and she believes this would serve as a great aid for non-tech grads to be able to
make decisions regarding their choice of algorithms.

Mariah strongly believes in helping students connect the dots more quickly by giving them a tool to learn about multiple
algorithms. Understanding when to use a specific algorithm and why is just as important as how an algorithm is
implemented. Developers in training can get a better grasp on the tradeoffs of selecting one algorithm over another to
augment their skillset. She believes this project will serve as a great educational tool for students trying to get a
grip of the subject of sorting as a whole.

The goal of this project fits Mit’s pursuits of being better prepared to handle the multitude of problems that will be
thrown at him on the job once he moves to the industry. Data visualizations making it easier to choose the right
algorithm on the job by comparing and benchmarking the performance of various algorithms on different inputs.

## What is the Question We Wish to Answer?

Problem: The main aim of this project is to be able to build an educational, visualization tool for analyzing various
sorting algorithms. Most learners struggle to see how different sorting algorithms work between each other for a common
dataset. There are lot of websites and tools online like VisuAlgo that helps understand implementation of different
types of algorithms for usually small data sets and only allow implementation knowledge to the user. Based on our
research, we did not find any tools that would allow the user to understand and pick the best algorithm for their
datasets based on comparisons of these most sort after algorithms.

Solution: We want to design an visual tool for sorting algorithms that not only has the preliminary features of the
prevalent online websites for visualizing algorithm i.e. understanding how the algorithms work by showing a step by step
breakdown, but we want to take a step ahead and allow the users to see which algorithm would work better for their data
sets based on a comparison chart. Our ultimate goal is to be able to implement basic visualizations along with
comparisons specific to their data set and further, be able to implement a side-to-side visualization tool to help them
understand the algorithms better. Our tool will allow a user to easily compare the performance of different algorithms
on different inputs. We understand that the undertaking of this project is ambitious and therefore have divided our
projects into MVP and stretch goals dependent on the progress of our project as time permits.

https://gifer.com/en/gifs/sorting-algorithm

## Scope

We will examine various sorting algorithms for numerical datasets.
More specifically, we intend to look at six key algorithms belonging to three distinct classes. These classes were
decided based on their time complexities. They are as follows:

1. Linear – counting sort, and bucket sort
2. Linearithmic – merge sort and quicksort
3. Quadratic – insertion sort and bubble sort.

Though there are many more classes of algorithms based on this criterion, we believe that examination of algorithms
belonging to these unique categories will provide a diverse view of varying runtimes.

Time permitting, this tool can be expanded to include more algorithms in other classes for the purpose of comparison to
expand the range of complexities investigated. Potentially, we will further develop our tool to include algorithmic
specific visuals to aid in the display of any algorithm. For example, this may include creating buckets to better
explain distribution of numerical elements in bucket sort. It may also include the demonstration of breaking an original
array into singular fragments so they may be placed back together in ascending order for merge sort. These more
intricate visualization ideas could further supplement the algorithms we wish to examine and would serve to create a
further comprehensive tool.

## Description

<img width="1431" alt="Screen Shot 2022-08-06 at 5 50 12 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/98000652/183267173-daeacc48-ffac-4b96-b644-cacdaad8306e.png">

 
